---
layout: page
title: Topic Model
---

# Topic Model

Here we discuss topic modeling as a simple example of AI; additionally, we present an example of a topic model we constructed which demonstrates the presence of mind/body discussion across a very large corpus of scholarly philosophical literature. On the whole, we avoid technical details about the process of creating and using a topic model in favor of higher level and intuitive explanations.

A _topic model_ is an unsupervised machine learning technique in which the machine finds patterns of word co-occurrence across a corpus of documents. (There are also supervised learning techniques, in which we would give guidelines to the machine on what topics to create, and the machine would organize the words in the texts into these categories.) These patters of word co-occurrence are then grouped together into "topics." (Technically, the model assigns a probability value of a given word belonging to a given topic.) For example, if we were to take a number of blogs about pets, the topic model would notice that certain words tend to appear together across the blogs such as "cat," feline," "litter box," "claws," and "meow." The topic model may also notice another group of words appearing together across the blogs such as "dog," " canine," "leash," and "bark." The topic model would identify the first group of words as "Topic 1" and the second group of words as "Topic 2." The human user of the topic model could further identify "Topic 1" as "Cats" and "Topic 2" as "Dogs." In this way, a topic model can identify the main themes of a large corpus of documents far more efficiently than a human. Unsupervised models also create the possibility hat the machine will identify patterns and topics that the human researcher was not expecting.

For the purposes of this presentation, we built a topic model using articles these philosophical journals: _Philosophical Review_, _Mind_, _Nous_, _Journal of Philosophy_, and _Philosophy and Phenomenological Research_. We obtained these articles from [JSTOR Data for Research](https://www.jstor.org/dfr/). After filtering out articles that were nothing more than volume information and forwards, the remaining corpus totaled 41,600 articles dating from 1892 - 2013. This model is visualized below. The circles on the left represent each topic in terms of how much of the corpus it represents; the location of circles on the x, y axis indicates how similar a given topic is to other topics in the corpus. The words on the right are what words are included in a given topic. You can navigate through each topic by using the buttons in the gray area on the top left or by hovering over each circle with your cursor. Again, leaving technical details aside we ask you to interact with this visualization and think about how you would label the topics and whether or not this model produces meaningful results.

{% include model-viz.html %}

Data visualizations in general, and the above visualization specifically, are objects of interpretation in that they both interpretations and in need of interpretation. Here, topic 11 and topic 31 each appear to be topics about the philosophy of mind. Topic 11 features the term "body" in the top five most prominent terms along with "mind," "mental," "physical", and "consciousness." This suggests that topic 11 could be narrowed from a broader category of philosophy of mind to a narrower discussion of the mind-body problem. This topic is then important for our consideration here.
